I thought I would speak on everything I
thought I'd speak on actually the the
developments in the world east and west
and these developments have led have led
some people to say that Marxism is dead
Marxism is over it's irrelevant it's
obsolete it has nothing to say about the
world it's a failure and that's been
proven by the collapse of communist
governments in Eastern Europe I'm not
too worried about the question of
Marxism being dead because I've been
hearing that for 40 years now that
Marxism is irrelevant that it it doesn't
work that history is proving it wrong
but let me say that Marxism is not a
theory about existing socialist
societies preponderantly the corpus of
Marxist theory is about something else
the amount of Marxist writings about
existing social societies is very small
about what socialism would look like
that theory is is very underdeveloped in
fact and I and I think in a way that
practice went way ahead of theory in
that respect in many societies we always
hear that theory is all mapped out but
it doesn't you never get it developed in
practice it's easy to spin a theory but
there's no practice in fact more often
than not it's the other way around that
this often quite a bit of things
happening and the theory hasn't been
developed to explain what's happening
Theory often is catching up to practice
and the Marxist theory about existing
social societies is a very naive theory
it said that once you get rid of
capitalism once you heal certain
contradictions and abuses and
exploitations in society and once you
can utilize the social production people
are going to act differently and people
are going to be really happy etcetera
etc and that isn't quite what happened
Marxism the other 90% of Marxism is
about
capitalism Marxism is a theory about
capitalism and it's a theory which says
that capitalism has certain dynamics
capitalism has a tendency to accumulate
capital for the sake of accumulating
capital that's what Marxism says
launches and says that capitalism is not
a system about building jobs or building
communities or creating work or creating
a better standard of living that
capitalism will create jobs or destroy
jobs depending on whether or not there's
profit it will create communities
Levittown's whatever else ticky-tack
boxes whatever else it'll create
beautiful houses if there's someone who
could pay beautiful prices or it will
destroy communities as it destroyed pol
town in Chicago to build a Cadillac plan
it will create jobs or it will close out
jobs through automation or through
exporting those jobs to cheaper labor
markets in Hong Kong or South Korea
whatever else the capitalism is a
dynamic that has very little to do with
human needs it's a dynamic that has to
do with the maximization of profit it's
central imperative the central law of
capitalist motion and development is the
maximization of profit is capital
penetration for the sake of capital
accumulation and it will use this the
the environment as a septic tank not
because people are nasty not because
they're stupid and anything else but
because that is rational it's rational
to do that and that's the Marxist
analysis of capitalism and that's the
difference between a liberal complaint
and a radical analysis because the
liberal will spend the rest of his life
complaining about these things being
wrong and saying aren't we foolish
aren't we irrational that we foul our
environment in this way when are we
going to come to our senses the
implication always is that the person
who's saying that is somehow morally
better and nicer and no we do
differently than all the other silly
foolish confused people around
the Marxist analysis says no that isn't
true that the reason fires don't built
that tire company plant on the Mill
River in Connecticut and took a river
that Mother Nature had spent a hundred
million years developing that was used
for recreation and fishing and drinking
water and fires don't dump that raw
industrial effusion into that water
wasn't because they were foolish because
they were confused or silly but they
were rational because the commitment
wasn't to that River it wasn't to the
environment it wasn't the children
playing it wasn't to future generations
it wasn't to the community although
they'll say that in their PR the
propaganda as they're doing now with
Earth Day Exxon coming out with ads on
Earth Day blows my mind I say where am i
1984 oh well what is this Exxon we love
the earth - well we've had a few little
rough spots here there but we're with
you on Earth Day because they had
nothing to do with that and that's a
monstrous analysis and the marks that
says it's quite rational to dump your
raw if industrial effusion into that
River because that maximizes your
profits and the essence of that system
is the maximization of profit is capital
accumulation and every other human value
is secondary and in fact possibly even
antagonistic to that value it doesn't
matter then those values shall be
smashed sometimes some of them can be
accommodated if they can be accommodated
within the parameters of profit if not
then they have to go so that's the
difference and that's what Cameron
now if you want to say if you want to
say that that analysis is no longer
pertinent because like Valencia has
proven himself to be what I always knew
he was a right wing a right a right wing
capital capitalist admirer if you want
to say that I don't get the connection I
don't see that the liberal will say but
how foolish how wasteful our military
budget is the Air Force builds an f-16
fighter plane
the Navy Air Force builds an f-16
fighter plane which is almost a
duplicate total duplication billions of
dollars duplicated when we already had
that weapon isn't that foolish and
wasteful and the Marxist analysis says
no that's not foolish and wasteful
that's only foolish and wasteful from a
human point of view from the taxpayers
point of view from the needs of your
human community but who the hell ever
said capitalism had anything to do with
the human community if you think it does
just listen to George Bush and find out
what has he ever been saying about the
needs of the human community two years
in office it's not wasteful it's
wonderful if you're a defense contractor
then it's wonderful to have a contract
with the Navy and one with the Air Force
and you'll even go for one with the
Marines and with the Seabees and you try
to sell the f-16 to the Coast Guard if
you could do it if you could get away
with it it's perfectly rational and so
you got to decide are you going to spend
the rest of your life as a half-ass
liberal complaining about the
irrationalities and the foolishness of
all these programs that's all we ever
hear in the media to the extent we get
any criticisms of existing policy or are
you going to point out the links of
class power and class interests that are
behind those things that keep doing
those things do you really think that
because you don't know what they're
doing they don't know what they're doing
and that's why when someone says how can
you still be a Marxist it's like someone
saying to me how can you still think
there's a law of gravity don't you see
we have an airplane now how could I
pretend that it's just foolish or that
that I don't know why the US is in El
Salvador or that they're in Central
America because they're just got some
ego thing or they're in Central America
because they chasing ghosts in they're
all confusing their policy
it's very rational to be in Central
America in Central America because
you have to keep the world safe for this
global process of capital penetration
and capital accumulation and the
countries you attack and go after are
the ones which might take a
revolutionary path or not even so
revolutionary our bends in Guatemala
wasn't a revolutionary gulag in Brazil
wasn't a revolutionary Sukarno in
Indonesia wasn't a revolutionary IND in
Chile wasn't a revolutionary Mossadegh
in Iran wasn't a revolutionary the Greek
premiers under papandrious weren't
revolutionaries when the when the
fascist generals came in but what they
were they were populist nationalist
Noriega and the People's Democratic the
the Democratic Revolutionary Party in
Panama isn't a revolutionary party it's
a populist party but it's a left
military in Panama it was the people's
defense force was the Panamanian Defense
Force was a left force and they used to
shake down the companies instead of
nationalizing them they shook him down
and then they took that money and built
social programs Panama had social
welfare programs that had social
security it had Human Services they were
developing it by Central American
standards they were pretty good and that
has to be destroyed and when it became
clear that Noriega wasn't down man but
he was continuing in Torrio's his path
Torrio's who was killed by the CIA I
charged them with that murder when his
plane mysteriously blew up in midair
then Noriega had to go well we're not in
Panama to get Noriega
we got Noriega several months ago but
we're there and we've arrested thousands
of trade union leaders and political
leaders and intellectuals Panama City
University is being purged of left
people other people are being rounded up
now you could say I don't understand why
we're in Panama I don't understand why
we're in Central America I don't
understand why we did that Indonesia I
don't understand why we back the wrong
side all the time it's not the wrong
side it's the wrong side from a human
point of view it's the wrong side from a
point of view of social justice but it's
a correct side that's correct
policy that's correct policy if your
constituency is the fortune 500 then
your correct policy to go into those
countries and keep them open for capital
penetration and capital accumulation on
your turns where those resources are
yours where those markets are yours
where that workforce is a cheap labor
force where you can pay them not seven
dollars an hour and not eleven dollars
an hour like you got to do in Ohio or
California but you can pay them seventy
cents an hour and that's very rational I
mean we're talking about billions of
dollars and difference billions of
dollars that would otherwise go to the
people who work for wages and salaries
or have pensions billions of dollars
taken from the pockets of the people who
live off interests and dividends and
Commission royalties like when they own
land that has oil on or something and
rents that class is the class that is
served by George Bush if you think not
then you tell me what is his tax policy
he has only one tax policy which is to
cut capital gains in fact the only
domestic bill that George Bush has
pushed for in two years that he's been
in office is a cut in the Capitol gate I
mean really push well you know calling
up senators lining up votes and all that
sort of thing it's a cut in the capital
gains tax cutting it for that point five
one half of one percent of the
population that would benefit from that
tax cut in every other area he's doing
nothing in the environment he's doing
nothing
he gets up before an international
environmental group two months ago and
he says considerations about the
environment must always take into
account must always take into account he
has that dynamic way of talking just
turns your sets you on fire and I said
go for George Eko he said considerations
of environments always take into account
the free market and economic development
translated profits before environment he
was saying he was saying what I just
said
you see the argument that Marxist make
is that George Bush is Marxist he
doesn't know he's Marxist but he is
performing he says what we say he says
he said screw your environment buddy its
profits first senator Stephen Simms of
Iowa Idaho Idaho made a very good point
he said it much better it won a radio
interview not long ago I heard him he
said if it's a question of choosing
between ecology and capitalism then I'm
picking capitalism I thought that was a
fashion I said wait a minute
what do you mean you're picking
capitalism over ecology it's like
someone saying if it's a question of
choosing between smoking or my lungs I'm
picking smoking you know but you need
your lungs even for smoking so when they
say that when they say that Marxism is
no longer relevant I don't know what
they're talking about because that's
what a Marxist analysis is it's analysis
about the laws of capital motion and
development and about class power and
interest it's also an analysis about
another capitalist force the most potent
and powerful in shaping the map of the
world the most potent and powerful over
the last 500 years which you never
studied in school I'll bet most of you
maybe wanted to which you never studied
in school because it's a because
capitalism is not only an economic order
it's a whole social order it's not just
an economic system it's a whole social
system and in capitalist schools and in
the West you don't study it but Marxism
is a study is a study of that other most
potent force in the history of mankind
over the last five centuries
it's called imperialism and it has
carved up the world it has murdered
literally millions upon millions of
people either by direct violence or
through starvation and deprivation and
other ways and it's not taught I can
tell you you can get a PhD in political
science from Yale you
versity and never once study imperialism
I you're looking at it you're looking at
someone who did that very thing and when
I wrote my book the sword in the dollar
it kept occurring to me why did I have
to wait till now now to to to read or
discover some of the things that I'm
writing about so that's what Marxism is
about it's about it's it's a study of
capitalism and it's a study of them it
makes some other statements it says that
the process of capital accumulation and
concentration is an indigenous
characteristic here in tendency by the
way a tendency doesn't mean it's
inevitable and must always be manifested
but it's an inherent tendency is the
tendency toward increasing
concentrations of capital is that no
longer relevant can someone come up come
up and say that's no longer relevant
when over the last eight years the ten
largest mergers in the 400 year history
of capitalism took place in the last
eight years giant multinational
conglomerates not gobbling up smaller
companies but gobbling up other giant
multinational conglomerates when a giant
multinational conglomerate conglomerate
like NBC incorporated which owns media
and TV and radio stations and publishing
houses and recreation parks and and
things in the three different continents
when NBC is gobbled up by a still larger
giant multinational conglomerate called
General Electric or sometimes the
smaller one buys out the bigger one but
it doesn't matter the amazing
concentration of capital is going on
that's what Marx wrote about if that's
not correct then Marxism is irrelevant
if it is correct then you might want to
give a better look at what's happening
another thing that the Marxists say is
that there is along with this growing
concentration of capital growing
immiseration
growing impoverishment of masses of
people well that's not or that's not
relevant
everybody's middle-class we all got VCRs
now
and all sort of thing well you got to
look at the whole globe and you will
find that in fact the trend over the
last 40 years has been for increasing
impoverishment increasing poverty
increasing malnutrition because because
of that capital concentration and that
capital penetration and capital
accumulation the Brazilian miracle of
the 1960's which showed a growth in the
in the growth in the gross national
income and the gross national product of
the nation also created the black bean
shortage that land that used to be used
for beans and rice and corn was taken
away and used by agribusiness to grow
tobacco and coffee and sugar and cotton
and beef for cash export markets
elsewhere and of course it's going to
mean an increase in your gross national
product of course you're making more
money off that land when you're when
you're growing coffee for commercial
markets then when some peasants own it
and they're growing beans and corn but
the people are starving with that gross
national product increase doesn't show
you is that the MAL distribution is
increasing and so all throughout the
world you see that tendency not just the
poor but even what's called the middle
class in the third world and the middle
class is a very rather privileged
stratum they too are suffering and being
dragged down and are complaining about
the terrible problems they're having so
the Marxist prediction that the tendency
in capitalism is for an increasing and
increasing impoverishment of the masses
is true even in our own country the
country that those Eastern Europeans
love and dream of and talk about with
stars in their eyes when you talk to
them and they say oh but in America it's
different in America you don't know I
know because I have seen it on your
television in America it's different
even in our own country in the last 10
years the number of people living below
the poverty level have gone from 24
million to 35.5 million now down to 34
point 4 5 million
what that means in the last decade the
poor are the fastest-growing social
group in America well that's what Marx
was talking about even putting aside the
poor that again that middle class is
finding all sorts of people who have to
hold down two jobs people who today are
working much harder just to stay in the
same place real wages have gone down in
the last 15 or 20 years since 1977 or
earlier so that doesn't sound like it's
too far off the mark that sounds like a
very real description not only a
description of what's happening because
you can make a prediction for totally
wrong reasons
you know conservatives are sometimes
right I mean even a broken clock is
Right twice a day as they say and so
yeah but not only that that prediction
but giving you an analysis and an
explanation as to why that dynamic can
be happening why you can have 35 million
poor amid so much wealth Marxist also
say that there are growing levels of
exploitation and capital accumulation
and that's true the degree of profits
are terrific that they're within the
midst of all that profits there's a
growing tendency to have a falling rate
of profit so that no matter how rich and
big and how much you're making your
profits are never really stable there's
always a problem of them going down
there's always a problem of even the
richest corporations going out of
business which again is true you saw
Chrysler almost crashed and went out it
didn't go because Chrysler got the m1
tank the Marxist description of
capitalism is that it's a force which
goes everywhere in the globe turning
every corner of the world into its own
image that process is still going on
today and maybe you read about a month
ago in the LA Times a special report on
the rainforests of Borneo in the South
Pacific here you have people who've
lived very beautiful lives by the
descriptions they had their own orchards
and groves in the jungles in the
had they raised food they hunted and all
that and it's all being wiped out as
capitalism comes in for the hardwood and
turns these people quite systematically
quite deliberately into wage earners
getting them and the way you turn people
like that into wage earners is you
deprive them of their source of
sustenance once you deprive them of
their source of sustenance they then
have to go after the wage as being the
thing which will sustain them that by
the way is a capital is a Marxist
analysis you can read Marxism every day
in your daily newspapers the dynamics
that have been discussed by Marx Che
Guevara said we can't help it that in
Latin America reality is Marxist that
there are very rich people and they live
off the backs of the poor and that the
impoverishment is increasing and that
they use the power of the state to
defend their holdings and to prevent
competing or alternative social orders
from coming in to develop and use the
land the labor the capital the markets
in a different way I think what's
happening in Eastern Europe and in the
Soviet Union because I think the same
process is going on there I think there
too you can see capitalism at work one
of the factors never talked about and
it's not talked about by Russians by
Soviet writers either who right now are
in an imbecilic orgy of
self-flagellation and criticism to the
point where the more negative they can
be about their society the better they
seem to feel a few years ago you could
never say anything negative about the
Soviet Union if you were there they
never say and you say what's the problem
we don't have any problems you must have
some problems whether it's nice now they
can't say anything positive those same
people are now in an orgy of
self-criticism
but the one thing they never talk about
because they're too busy flagellating
themselves is that the failure of these
communist societies is not just a
failure
socialism of that particular form of
state socialism will seed socialism it's
a fair it's a it's a victory of
capitalism it is an example of
capitalism at work because for 70 years
in the Soviet Union for 40 years in
Eastern Europe and for 10 years in
Nicaragua for 30 years in regard to Cuba
you have had capitalist encirclement and
one of the major factors in the failure
of these societies is the power of
capitalist encirclement that capitalist
encirclement has meant invasions civil
wars sabotage mercenary armies
destruction of the productive facilities
of the society more invasion more
sabotage economic boycott economic
embargo monetary embargo technological
embargo which have distorting effects
upon a society in May of 1921 Lenin got
up before the Bolshevik the party
convention and he said we've had enough
with the workers opposition let's get
rid of them now the workers opposition
were loyal Bolsheviks they were
communists they were in the Bolshevik
Party they were in the Communist Party
when the Kronstadt rebellion came the
workers opposition did not side with the
Kronstadt cell as they sided with the
party in the civil war they were with
the party throughout all the struggles
the workers opposition were with the
party but they had formed a
self-conscious caucus that had decided
that it would represent the particular
interests of the industrial proletariat
against the party itself at times and
after all this invasion all this
destruction all this terrible death and
and and struggle with Lennon once said
Soviet Russia is like a man with a death
fever just hanging on by an inch of his
life
after all that Lenin turned and said
we've had enough opposition the feeling
very much was that that opposition was a
wedge and opening it invited our enemies
our mortal enemies to come in and attack
us and divide us and the party
convention uproariously supported him
and said no more workers opposition no
more factions within the party so right
there that emphasis on a monolithic
and by the way that same month or the
month before in an April Lenin call for
a strengthening of the trade unions and
for more worker representation on the
Central Committee of the Communist Party
so it wasn't that he was moving anti
worker it was that he was moving against
opposition so right there you see the
seeds you see of a of a system that
could not develop naturally with an
opposition with checks with internal
debate and argument a system that began
to strain for uniformity for siege for
lockstep cooperation the emphasis being
on organizing getting the thing done
stop asking too many questions because
everything was a life-and-death issue
when the Sandinistas came to power in
Nicaragua ten years ago filled with
ideals and hopes for their nation and
their people they discovered a very
awful thing and it wasn't about
themselves even though they had to do it
to themselves it was about that
capitalist encirclement they discovered
that they needed a secret police they
discovered that they needed a security
police because all around them coming in
from two borders and within their own
society were acts of sabotage espionage
attacked mercenary invasion and the like
and they understood that if the
revolution was going to survive it would
have to build up instruments of state
power instruments of coercion even and
these instruments by the way can make
mistakes and these instruments can not
only make mistakes they can commit some
serious crimes although in Nicaragua the
impressive record is how few crimes
there were given the utterly dire
conditions they were under so that kind
of that that that capitalist
encirclement which goes on unrelenting
attacking any existing socialist
communist if you don't want to buy the
way if some of you don't want to call
those societies socialist don't call
them socialist called them window shades
of camels whatever you want to call them
as long as you know what I mean that I
mean I mean the I mean the public
ownership of the means of production
using capital in a different way not for
capital accumulation per se is an end in
itself a strong social wage
free education free medical care and
subsidized housing subsidized food
subsidized bread all those things that
the Hungarians and poles are now
complaining about losing that's what I
mean by socials if you don't want to
call that socialist that's not what real
social real socialism is something
that's going to exist someday when the
world and people are better and
different and it's going to come down
and be in a much better form than those
things were that's fine but in this
world see I believe socialism is not
that real beautiful goal in that society
participation harmony this net
I believe that socialism is a process of
struggle to achieve that thing so so so
so just go along with my vocabulary if
you have even if you have trouble with
it
those socialist or communist societies
suffered terrible distorting effects if
there had been no invasion there been no
espionage if there been no attack of
there been no white card armies burning
villages there wouldn't have been a red
army of that size there wouldn't have
been a Stalin there wouldn't have been a
KGB there hadn't been a CIA they
wouldn't been a KGB if they hadn't have
been if there hadn't been a NATO
encirclement they wouldn't have been a
Warsaw Pact and to lose sight of that
fact is to lose sight of an essential
force of what was going on over those
seventy years or ten years and if you
want to know what the Soviet Union went
through in its early years just look at
what Nicaragua went through in these ten
years and then multiply that by ten
every single one of those countries was
targeted they were targeted by missiles
they were targeted by acts of espionage
they were targeted by as I say economic
embargo and all sorts of other forms of
aggression they were targeted by
incredible propaganda barrage and the
like unrelenting unremitting the most
targeted socialist country in the world
as of a couple years ago and actually
still to today is not Nicaragua was not
Nicaragua not even Cuba it was the
Soviet Union all those missiles were
pointing to the USSR they still are and
they're still building those missiles
and they're refusing to negotiate those
missiles at the
sea-based missiles which is where the US
has 75% of its first strike force they
have announced that they will not
negotiate that 75% of the first strike
force only their 25% which is land-based
and the Soviets of course 75% of their
force is land-based
and only 25% is sea bass and not a bit
none of it working very well because
they've got just a few choke points and
they don't have that much access to sea
and they don't have all the fueling
stations and harbors and whatever else
that the US has around the world so that
kind of encirclement is still there and
that kind of thing is still going on and
so if you want to understand something
about and that's why Gorbachev is one of
the reasons he's trying to normalize
international relations even at the risk
of giving away the whole store it's
because he's hoping that would give him
a free it also doesn't want to see the
world blown up of course and he wants to
end the Cold War but he also wants to
see that as a means of normalizing
social relations in his own country when
you have to when you have a burden which
is twice as heavy as we have in this
country a military burden of that sort
you've got to do something about it
before you lose your whole economy these
countries also by the way suffered from
a lot of other things they suffered from
centuries of under development and
poverty there's a lot of talk in the
media right now for instance that Pollan
is being left in such bad shape
the Communists have left Poland in such
bad shape I think there's a certain
poetic justice about that you should
have seen Poland when the Communists
took it over the when the capitalists
left it it was an it was a total death
totally decimated hundreds of villages
destroyed whole cities all of Warsaw
destroyed reduced to rubble poverty
malnutrition starvation that's what the
Communists took over and they built up a
Poland that was worse or as bad as any
third-world country in some cases worse
in terms of what had happened to its
industrial base and its infrastructure
and everything else and built it up so
there's this an incredible economic
backlog I mean the countries that are
taken over of cuba nicaragua and then
what happens to them when they're in
there and by the way as I said let me
repeat
not just these countries are targeted by
capitalist encirclement but even any
kind of mildly populist nationalist
country a Libya a Panama a Guatemala
under Arbenz a Chile under end a and a
was a Marxist but his government was a
popular unity government made up of six
different parties with all sorts of
different tendencies and he emphasized
again and again that it wasn't a Marxist
society another thing these countries
have had especially in Eastern Europe
very relevant to Eastern Europe is
ideological backwardness not only
economic but ideologically this
incredible incredible ideological
retrograde elements dominant in these
countries you know the media listening
to the media today you would get the
impression that that Eastern Europe is
now going back to its democracy it is
regaining its democracy elect for when
Glick but when Sir says let Poland be
what it was in 1940 before the war I
said right wait a minute
Poland in 1940 was a right-wing fascist
dictatorship powerful Church that
controlled all the education no freedom
of dissent anti-semitic poor privileged
barons owning estates workers are
working at subsistence wages starvation
wages that's what you want to go back to
like for winter well you're doing a very
good job of it I must say and most all
of these countries were fascist
countries before World War two except
Czechoslovakia which was a Western
parliamentary democracy but Hungary was
a fascist country
it was allied to the Nazis in World War
two Bulgaria was a fascist country
it was allied with the Nazis and fought
with the Nazis in World War two Romania
was a fascist country
it was allied with the Nazis Lithuania
it was allied with the Nazis do you
forget it or some of us haven't forgot
it these were anti-semitic fascist
countries that supported the powers that
be in the most retrograde narrow way
supported by petty bourgeois mentalities
that themselves were superstitious and
religious ridden and we'll
individualistic anti-semitic Nazi
collaborators priest ridden those by the
way those elements are not taking too
much time in surfacing again in
Lithuania in Hungary even taking on the
party they're talking about the
Christian justice party Hungary just
invited Pinochet to come to Hungary to
tell them how they should handle their
economy how do you do that harsh surgery
that you did so well in Chile after you
kicked out that the invitation was
rescinded because it didn't look too
good you look you can be a fascist but
don't invite overt fascists in you know
Hungary invited the South African
Foreign Minister to come in listen to
have au president of Czechoslovakia the
guy who said with that false humility I
knew this guy was going to run the day I
read a statement he said they said will
you be President he said I am NOT a
politician
I am a playwright I am just a writer I
said this guy's going for it you know
you know you know it when they when they
talk humble like that oh man he's going
for it
and once he became president he couldn't
stop the first thing you went to bond he
goes to Moscow he goes here he's going
there issuing proclamations all over and
he's talking about the Christian family
and the Christian nation and he's
talking about how before world war two
Oh since world 2 is the forces of light
that was the West against the forces of
darkness and that was communism the
forces of light in the West were those
are the forces of light that killed all
those people in say year that created
South Africa that have destroyed so many
people in Latin America and Central
America
those are the forces of light that's the
free world and Havel is buying in and
talking that reader's digest George Bush
line right down the way so this
incredible ideological conservativism
and background having said all that I do
not want to deny that there were very
real problems within those systems
themselves and I won't go on I see I've
talked so long a bureaucratic mode of
operation a or a structured higher
rocki organization that did not allow
for proper feedback and corrective
measures a an organizational ethic as in
every organization where your destiny in
your advance in the organization depends
on what not on serving your constituency
but on but on pleasing the person above
you a media that was really in
terms of its propaganda or its ability
to present things about the world if you
always I was raised hearing about proc
communist propaganda what struck me is
how the the kind of propaganda that came
out of communist countries or even in
them was so fifty years behind what the
US had I mean they don't have a media
culture they don't have an advertising
culture they don't know how to do image
in this and that and all as witnessed by
the fact that now they're having
elections they call Westerners in please
come and tell us how to manipulate the
public in elections but you guys you
guys have been doing that for years
aren't you you're wicked diabolic
communist you should know how to do it
and no we don't know how do you well how
do I sell myself like a soap product
well we also learned that people people
cannot live by the social wage alone
that out our once our needs are
satisfied then I once become our needs
and our wants tend to escalate I was
talking to an East German friend of mine
who is complaining about conditions in
East Germany by the way the complaints
are interesting because the image we
have here of these communist countries
is of this totalitarian pressing down
and crushing and the complaints they
have when you talk to them is that God
did things a whole goof off it's a goof
up nobody's minding the store or there
should be more labor discipline we build
a nice housing project people moved in
and they're not bothering to pay the
rents the Klaus his wife Marion was
furious about that they're living in
these beautiful nice housing project and
said they're not even paying the rent
and nobody's getting around to collect
the rents well you can't run a country
quite that well if that happens but then
he was complaining about those things
and by the way a lot of the complaints
are legitimate complaints the fate of
the whistleblower in in communist
socialist countries is the same as the
fate of the whistleblower in our country
you complain you don't get rewarded for
your integrity you get into trouble
but he was complaining about the junky
cars and you can't get any oranges and
we don't get any bananas or just maybe
he said at Christmastime there's a
shipment of oranges and everybody in the
factory in a town he knows that is in
East Germany everybody in the factory
leaves in the middle of the workday and
rushes down the airline to buy the
oranges I said in the US you'd be
machine-gunned if you did that I mean
you would be maybe a century ago he'd be
fired if you did that in fact East
Germans would go to West Germany and
discover when they want to rush off the
job to go shopping they get fired and
they didn't know that he's talking about
you know not being able to get this and
that doesn't quite work as well as I
want and I said to him I said well Klaus
what about you know your free education
your health care free health care I mean
you know some of us don't have health
insurance I when I was time I was
talking to him I didn't have health
insurance what happens to healthier is
terrible what about you got you
subsidize this and subside that and all
that and and his answer was I thought
very good it really summed it all up he
said oh nobody ever talks about that
I said that's interesting and you can
see what's happening now nobody ever
talks about that but they assumed that
that's was what they were going to have
they took for granted those things they
had and they are looking now for the
goodies and the East Germans by the way
were stunned last year I mean before the
border opened and all this stuff
happened when something like 800 of
their doctors applied to emigrate
because their doctors do have the
goodies they have a little apartment a
nice apartment they have a car they have
phones they have all these other things
they have a very good income and all
that and these doctors were applying to
emigrate and the government was really
stunned and say why why you and the
answer is they want to see Paris they
want to travel and they don't have any
hard currency by the way there wasn't
such a restriction on travel Klaus says
people could travel getting out of the
country was nordicist you couldn't even
have any hard currency it goes of the
exchange because of the monetary embargo
against the East German
currency and so you'd have to go to West
Germany stay with a relative you'd have
only ten dollars in your pocket and you
could stay only limited time and all
that they want to go elsewhere they want
to do all the things that are being done
elsewhere so the dynamic is that as
people get treated better they also want
more then not necessarily grateful for
what they have they want more in fact
they take for granted what they have
Laurence Wexler in his an article in The
New Yorker were interviewing some Polish
workers and he said well if this Factory
would you be in favor of this factory
being turned over to private hands and
then it would work more efficiently
under private ownership because they
would fire a lot of the featherbedding
you know a surplus workers and they said
yes that would be good be more
productive and per worker and they said
well what if you two lost your jobs and
they said well that's okay we'd still do
it you'd still do it yes because the
government would find us other jobs and
and Wexler said they don't get it they
don't get it they don't understand that
that social wage those securities those
built-in safety nets and all that are
going to go because you're getting this
other system that system that dynamic
system of capital penetration and
capital accumulation where you become an
instrumental value for this other end
you are no longer the end we no longer
worry about getting everybody a job here
we worry about who the people we could
pick the younger workers Wexler talks
about the older tired worker if he's too
slow the owner by the way a form of
solidarity leader comes along and fires
him on the spot to leave and then the
other workers don't even look up with
their heads he's fired the polls now are
taking abuses from their new capitalists
solidarity government that they would
have never tolerated under the communist
government and they say it's okay
because it's going to lead us to the
promised land soon and what they're
suffering now is a six hundred percent
inflation a hundred thousand unemployed
every month a hundred thousand hunger
bread lines in Poland by the way an
incredible story which
being reported very much I don't see it
on evening news you see I they have I
missed it shots of the bread lines and
the complaints and all that
nothing much they it's a sensational i
opening story the system that didn't
work is out and the system that does
work has come in and it's brought
massive unemployment and inflation
that's the system that works that's the
success story and that's the same the
problem because the pause when they're
thinking of capitalism are not thinking
of as a year and capitalist indonesia
and capitalist brazil and capitalist
mexico and capitalist turkey they're
thinking of West Germany Sweden Canada
the US that's what they think they're
gonna become but they're not gonna
become that they're becoming right
before our very eyes this year they're
becoming another Brazil or Mexico or
turkey well this is what we face I could
go on with other points I want to make
about what was wrong with existing
socialism but I think I'll stop there a
leadership that didn't suffer so much
from despotism as from arrogance a
leadership that talked only to each
other the Hungarian ambassador in
Washington I live in Washington to see
the Hungarian ambassador had a little
press conference and he was saying we're
changing our system and we say why
because it's failed it doesn't work say
why doesn't it work he said I don't know
and I wanted to grab this guy by his
lapels and shake them I said you don't
know wait a minute you've been in the
party a lead for 30 years and you don't
know why your system doesn't work who
have you been talking to what has been
happening how out of touch can a
leadership get very out of touch is the
answer very out of touch because they
begin to talk on to themselves it's a
system by the way it's a system by the
way that was suffered a great deal of
cultural penetration from the West you
cannot talk to these people and convince
them that there's poverty and discontent
in the West they don't believe you they
know they have they have imagined the
future and it is the US and if I say if
you say you know there are people
sleeping on gratings homeless be
both in New York and all that they said
that's not true
Mickey I just came back from New York he
said he didn't see any homeless people a
friend of mine was in Cuba I'm talking
to people there and he had a young man
say to him you Americans live well don't
tell me I see it on your television your
Miami television i watch dynasty and
dynasty in dallas and i see how you live
right we all go home and tell this to
our Butler's and our maids on our
estates as they do in dynasty that
cultural penetration by the way not just
Eastern Europe and socialist countries
all through the third world this myth
that America is the place of limitless
bounty that anybody in America could
live well if he just wishes so and is
willing to work and then you will live
well that view is the religion of
Eastern Europe of existing socialist
countries of the Soviet Union and of
most of the third world even though they
hate the Yankees in one amount of their
own country there is that there are
other many people who would who would
tomorrow come here we talk about the
refugees from communism the refugees
from capitalism if you open your doors
to Latin America and said anybody come
my troubled people come we'll let you in
let me tell you something about the
refugees from capitalism for those who
think that capitalism is triumphant
throughout the world in Italy in Italy
there's a movement called the democratic
movement of the unemployed in Naples now
Italy is capitalist countries go isn't
that bad there's some social democracy
there's a strong there's a Socialist
Party is a communist party
they've won some benefits so by many
standards Italy isn't so bad now in the
this is one of the better capitalist
countries they went to the Cuban embassy
in Rome the request was addressed to
Cuban President Fidel Castro it said
quote we have found it impossible to
live an honest decent life in our own
country permit us therefore to ask for
political asylum because we are fully
convinced that we will find in Cuba not
only social justice but also a little
peace and quiet all the same the
movement also presented an appeal to all
the parties in the Italian chamber of
cut
biddies which is the lower house asking
them to put pressure on the government
which continues to remain deaf to the
appeals of the group about the grave
problems facing unemployed young people
in Naples so right in the middle of all
this now here's an interesting unusual
story don't you think the media would
have had something on this well in the
midst of everybody East wanting to come
West there are some people West who want
to go east let's look at this for a
minute what does that mean I could do
the show but I guess I guess Tom broke
out that little twerp can't do it well
well that's what I'd say by that example
is let's discard the myth that
capitalism is triumphant that capitalism
has solved the problems of its people
that it's giving its people a good life
that it's giving the glow of a good
chance of survival because none of those
things are true and if though none of
those things are true about capitalism
then a lot of the things that Marxists
say are true and that means that we've
got to keep fighting and keep struggling
and keep doing the things we're doing to
try to change this awful inhuman system
today to bring humanity to it to bring
justice to it and to bring democracy
real democracy to it thank you
well I think what we practically do in
this society is try to move toward a
more trammeled and restricted capitalism
building expanding the public sector
moving moving toward national ownership
of some of basic industries and maybe a
mixed economy that's the goal we should
fight for at this stage of historical
development but what we've been moving
toward in the last 10 years is really
toward a untrammeled capitalism one
which is breaking the labor unions and
is is really enjoying immense class
victories and doing it without the
fascism I mean some of me some elements
of fascism coercion the breaking of the
left in the late 60s early 70s but I'm
using force and violence I mean the FBI
all that stuff the killing the murder of
the Black Panthers and the like so there
are strains of fascism but generally
what Reagan accomplished is what
Mussolini and Hitler accomplished except
they did it by busting the political
system because the left was strong
enough in that system and the crises
were so immense that they broke that
system and whenever people discussed
fascism they never discussed what the
fascists did after they came to power
there's a literature on it who supported
Hitler who didn't support Hitler who was
behind who that but the question of not
who supported Nazism but what did not
system support when it came into power
and they did just what Ronald Reagan did
but Reagan did it within the within the
forms of a democratic so-called
democratic framework because the working
class is excluded from politics in this
country and the model they're trying to
develop and that's the model they
developing in Eastern Europe is to
exclude the working class that's another
myth you're getting in the media that
the other myth they're getting in the
media is that they're moving toward
pluralism in Eastern Europe the
pluralism lasted two months it's over
ladies and gentlemen it's over the media
is now being privatized well when your
private
Jamelia it goes into the hands of those
who can get financing from advertisers
or rich buyers and in Hungary Ruben
Murdoch has gone in there and a few
other right-wing press moguls and
they're buying up media in East Germany
the news agency that used to report
things about the u.s. suppression in the
third world all that has killed those
stories I can tell you I know the gdr
press corps in washington DC and they
don't report that anymore and their jobs
are finished and they're told that the
government has no more money for them
and they may have to be privatized they
said if we're privatized we have no
money though how could we operate so
that's it you don't have a pluralistic
media you got eight you got a capitalist
media so what we gotta fight for here is
real pluralism real ideological
difference real a real opening but I got
into that because I was trying to say
something else and I forgot my train of
thought was I think yeah
I thought I just told you we work toward
we work toward at this stage of
historical development and open
pluralistic Democratic Society which
would which would mean a greater
democratization of economic and
political power even if it doesn't mean
a vanguard one party totally
nationalized the economy that is if that
alternative doesn't work and and and
isn't doesn't work because it's not
democratic there's not enough feedback
there's no I don't wanna repeat my whole
lecture there's not enough
accountability there's not enough checks
and balances and all that and it had all
the other problems to it we struggle for
a a mixed economy social democracy at
this stage of development an
anti-imperialist people are all
struggling if you want to know what we
should work for you could see it all
around you who struggle it solidarity
work against imperialism and Central
America for protection of the
environment but we have to start calling
it correctly and understand when you
want protection of the environment
you're saying something very essential
about the nature of capitalism now your
question is a hard one that is if
capitalism is so bad and socialism
doesn't work what's the Third Way nobody
has a third way I mean history hasn't
given us a third way so the best we
could hope for is some kind of mixed
economy where we can do away with the
worst effects of capitalism and
introduce a stronger public sector what
you're getting in socialist countries
you here yes we must take what's good
from both what's that what does isn't
what they're getting what they're
getting is the worst is the worst of of
capitalism period they're getting the
worst of one system they ain't getting
much from whatever was good from the
other
well those are two things of a very long
list to survival of trade unions aside
from trade union democracy how about
democracy for trade unions trade union
democracy means within the Union there's
got to be more democracy more
participation but also democracy for the
unions in this country the union
organizing is one of the hardest this is
one of the hardest countries to organize
unions I mean the taft-hartley law is so
rigged as to make it very difficult to
get unions and then they get unions to
get the collective bargaining and
reassured to get them and then to get
the company to abide by the book in the
contract and so forth union organizing
has more legal restrictions in the
United States with the right-to-work
laws and everything else than a dozen
South Africa think about that one a
minute
right the an anarcho-syndicalist model
is posed I'm repeating the question as a
third model as opposed to the communism
or socialism or capitalism yeah an eco
symbolism sounds ok I just worker owned
worker owned factories become our
capitalist factories there's a market
they make lots of money the workers
begin to hire other workers that's what
happens with coops decentralization is
not necessarily more democratic it's not
even more equal just as something may be
centralized doesn't mean it's
undemocratic in our own country we have
decentralized the land and water
policies out in the West you have water
Commission's and water boards all around
the West those are federal water boards
and they've been decentralized under the
cloak of local participation you see it
sounds a beautiful participation well
you know what happens the big landowners
take over the boards and in the West he
who controls the water controls the land
controls the herds controls of the crops
everything else and so it becomes highly
undemocratic because they can make
decisions for their own economic
interests but you state power to do it
so you've actually parceled out and in
democracy for the few I have a whole
section call that the public-private
Authority there are all sorts of things
in our economy that have been parceled
out into private hands but with with
them what's the term with public
sanction behind them and that's not
democratic it's very decentralized but
it's not democratic and then we have
things that are very centralized that
are democratic social security if they
weren't raiding the fund but but but so
the social security has for years worked
in a very democratic way in the sense
that it it benefited the mass of working
people
it was a gala terian and it and it was
in the benefit of ordinary people the
women's infant nutrition program the
women's infant children's program WIC is
the one of the best dollar spent it's a
centralized program so so whether
something is centralized or
decentralized may not be the necessary
characteristic worker syndicalism the
problem with workers syndicalism is that
you've decentralized things to the point
where it's hard to imagine how a modern
economy would work and that's the
problem
people who went to who were in Poland
and asked they talked about working
syndicalism for a while and and the
questions were things like well what if
the workers in the steel mill want to
produce a different kind of steel and
the Gdansk shipyard can't use that steel
but they want to produce that different
steel because they want to sell it
somewhere else
so well the government will worry about
that it's so already you're making
reference to a central authority you
could say well we can make it so that
the work is in that steel mill must make
the steel mm-hmm that will serve the
shipyard one thing you're talking about
you're talking about coordination you're
talking about an authority above that
work of syndicalism that could say to
those workers no you can't do this
anyway you want what the problem is
you'll get the product you'll get the
anarchy of production you'll get a lot
of I think any qualms I think it
wouldn't be a bad thing to have work
more workers co-ops in this society I
think that would be a positive step
forward if you want to see a very
positive anarchists community you could
look at Mondragon in Spain where they
have actually done production and have a
lot of worker ownership and things are
done by participation by committees and
there's no profit reduction is for I
mean there's obviously profit you want
you want any in any society wanna have
some surplus surplus value that you
could use for retooling for expansion
for redeveloping and all that and when
when they have problems in one sector
and it's get got laid off they they try
to retrain the workers elsewhere the one
thing Mondragon doesn't have is state
power though it operates in one region
in Spain but it's a very good example of
maybe what you could do but I don't
think it's ultimately the answer in as
far as organizing the whole society
the question is I'd like to hear about
the about the criticisms of Stalin and
the rehabilitation of suck of you Karen
and those people I think criticisms of
Stalin are okay they most definitely are
we're in order and needed because Stalin
did not only made mistakes but he
committed some very serious crimes
against the people of the Soviet Union
and against his own party people in his
party so I don't think I don't think
that's too too terrible a thing what I
would I detect in the Soviet Union is a
among writers and academics and such is
a totally worshipful conservativism a a
worshipful attitude toward the West they
are now translating right-wing books
they're translating Robert conquest his
books on the Stalinist era
well conquest I mean even mainstream
Soviet ologists in this country
criticize conquest as as his work is is
really very unreliable and it it sites
very highly dubious and fabricated
sources and the like but that's who
they're printing in other words the more
negative it is the more attractive it's
become that's what I was saying earlier
before and that's what and that's what's
going on three years ago progress
publishes wrote to me and said we'd like
to translate democracy for the few into
Russian but could you update it and I
said no I don't update for foreign
editions I mean I'd spend the rest of my
life just writing that redoing that one
book and it's not worth it for what I
said but a new edition is coming out a
year and a half from now and I said oh
okay let us know so in the new edition
the fifth edition which is right there
came out I sent it to them they said let
us know as soon as possible we want to
publish this book I got the letter from
progress publishers and they got the
book and then I got a very strange
letter and it said thank you very much
if we go ahead with production we'll let
you know and they never published it and
what they are publishing now about
American politics are the standard
mainstream things about how we have a
democratic system how pluralistic it is
how wonderful it works and all sort of
things and those are the books they're
now publishing in the Soviet Union
that's what the that's what the
that's gnosis brought for a total
reaction to Marxism let me point out to
you literary Gazette literary Gazette is
a Soviet publication which is now
published in English and let me quote to
you from literary Gazette what they have
to say the editor writes editor-in-chief
he says when we have he's talking about
the fact that they have a I think the
guy is an artist of some kind he's
become Minister of Culture and they're
saying well people here are critical
that he's an artist he's Minister of
Culture when we should have a more
official kind of person he said that's
the difference between us
and the Americans the way Americans and
Soviets say things probably no one in
the US was surprised when X actor Ronald
Reagan was elected president I am aware
that after his artistic career that's
artistic not autistic I thought he said
autistic I am aware that after his
artistic career he picked up quite a bit
of experience as a statesman Hey and you
people know that don't you before
running for president of the United
States but I remember that Soviet news
analyst somehow overlooked his political
experience at least during his first
months in office and ridiculed the movie
star and the guise of a politician as
something typical of American life and
then he goes on and says he says there
is now a reduced threat of nuclear war
and there's progress in disarmament the
first positive results were achieved
under Reagan and now President Bush is
continuing in his footsteps not a
mention of Gorbachev or any of that
stuff
hmm then they talk about the Minister of
Culture there's a picture of him they
interview him a very long interview and
they say to him as follows last summer
there were heated debates at the Supreme
Soviet whether we need a Minister of
Culture at all get ready for this there
is no such ministry in the United States
and yet it seems that there is nothing
wrong with American culture
so that's so that's expla that's the
mentality they're nuts they're crazy and
there are people in the Communist Party
here including the leadership who
doesn't don't even recognize those
incredible changes that have been going
on there they are now anti-marxist they
think Marxism is old hat imperialism is
something never heard of although it's
still going on all over the world there
isn't there isn't a critical word in
literary Gazette or Moscow news about
the US only agile Ettore positive things
about capitalism and such the Soviet
geneticists are looking at looking at
sociobiology they're absolutely gung-ho
about it it reminds me of the Chinese
students I met in in Washington Chinese
from China who were demonstrating after
gen'leman square you know the ones who
were here were there and one of them
said to me I said what do you want what
exactly you want that you're
demonstrating there he said he said we
want I want to own the factory so now we
have factory manages they're just a name
that's just a name your manager but you
should own the factory yourself own it
remember his eyes glistening up this
exciting new idea in history called
private property you know I never hey
never heard of this thing before and it
you own it you see they're excited about
imperialism never heard of imperialism I
mean for Chinese if you can think of a
nation that has suffered from
imperialist outrages China is one of the
80 most violated countries I say 80
whenever I say who's the most vilely
there are 80 that are number one that
they all have horrible horrible
histories about them and China is right
up there well no imperialism what you
got here oh I got here and I turned to
the next student I said what are you
doing he says well I came he said I came
to study engineering but I'm taking
business courses of course this he said
I want to be entrepreneur he said I want
to be entrepreneur really exciting as
one of their leaders said is quoted in
The Guardian some time ago he said all
they think of is money money money
said that's good because that means
they've turned their backs on socialism
however I weed people do need some
values too don't they I mean so even one
even one of these
was saying the emphasis on money is okay
but we do need some values well I think
that it's not that those particular
Chinese kids are unduly corrupt or
whatever else it's that this is this
historical reaction they've had this
society and system and it somehow hasn't
brought the future the future hasn't
arrived and they now realize the way to
get the future is to go for it the way
they go for it in the West and this has
become the new and exciting idea for
them and they're going to have to learn
the hard way
first giving up their power they're
doing that right now before your very
eyes that well of this pressure it had
to come with a good push they had to
give up power but as far as your other
point that the external threats are
often used then to keep hold of power
and keep yourself free of internal
criticisms absolutely I thought I made
that same point that that the problem is
the systems developed bureaucratic modes
of operation there's no feedback there's
no there often is not enough
accountability now you see the thing
that was supposed to operate as the as
the conscience and the impetus and the
check on those abuses was the party that
is the party was supposed to be the eyes
the ears and the conscience and by the
way the party did operate that way to
some degree the party often did root out
corruption it often did push the forced
marches that were needed for
industrialization to fight off in Nazis
and whatever else the party performed
magnificent magnificently under siege
socialism when it was fighting for its
life and fighting for the life of a
nation but there also there also seems
to be and there's evidence in the Soviet
Union elsewhere that that same
corruption existed in the party itself
that same career ISM time servers all
that other stuff so you get back to the
ancient question of who guards the
Guardians so so that obviously that the
age of the Vanguard one-party system
doesn't doesn't hold anymore but as far
as I don't really understand your last
question has there ever been an example
of a communist leader who when they've
reached that final fourth stage of
communes have willingly given up power
well since no one has ever reached that
final fourth stage how could it be an
example of anyone haven't give enough
power but in existing communist
societies they've given up power one
wishes even with all the push and all
whatever hell one wishes that could be
done in El Salvador where two hundred or
twenty or thirty people are being killed
every day with seventy thousand people
have been killed and they're talking
about trade unionists and peasants
peasant leaders and cooperative leaders
and student leaders and workers have
been and priests and clergymen have been
killed trying to fight an autocratic
regime and here you got a country in
Poland Poland or
in Czechoslovakia a hundred thousand
people walk across the bridge into the
square and the government surrenders is
okay I guess you don't want this system
anymore and these are the totalitarian
power-hungry crazed ruthless communists
who would never give up power who are
only there for power who did not want
the power to end hunger
they only hungered for power that's what
we heard that's we heard there's all the
hunger for power and they're giving up
power I would love to see that happen in
Central America I would love to see what
happen I don't know as someone told you
excuse me sir IIIi really I really don't
appreciate the spirit in which you're
that you're injecting into this meeting
we're all friends here yeah wait a
minute nothing not well wait a minute
could you let me answer I want to make a
criticism of the way you've injected
that kind of spirit here and I don't
think you should boy we got some people
don't waste your time you know yeah yeah
this is the case the question is how do
you get people in power in a modern
industrial society how do you run things
with the people in power the people
themselves should be in power making the
decisions that's beautiful
who the hell's against that and it raise
your hand if you're against the people
themselves that's beautiful it's
beautiful what do you do how do the
people themselves joining in
participating in a consensus in the
give-and-take how do you fight off a tea
Nazi divisions doing that how do you go
east of the Urals and build a whole new
industrial base because you know you're
gonna be attacked from the West in
another Tet within ten years I mean how
do you do that how do you run a modern
airline with the people in power so
untrammeled participatory anarcho
spontaneous way of doing it the people
directly rolling it's beautiful who the
hell could be against it I love it I
wish that could be done how do you do
that I don't know
I don't know if I'd get on an airline
that was run by the people I would get
on an airline that was owned by the
workers who own that airline and were
caring for it
but I even even those workers I'd like
to have an outside audit because what we
have discovered ladies and gentlemen is
that even workers can get corrupt they
can scut stealing out of the till they
can start goofing off and all that sort
of thing it's it's a very utopian it's
like the free-market view there's a
whole bunch of talk going on now about
the free market and I say to students
the same thing I'd like to see you get
on an airline that was run purely on
free-market principles first of all you
wouldn't have an airport your airports
are socialist you know that your free
market private airplanes go to socialist
airports that have been paid for by the
people of America throughout taxes with
air controllers that are paid for by us
with a union that was busted by our
President and all that but those
airports are regulated by the state by
the federal government why because
airliners don't give a hoot about that
part of it they don't make any money out
of building the airport and regulating
all that they make money by getting the
passengers through so we have to the
public sector always has to come up
sweeping up cleaning up behind the
private sector and then the private
sector can turn around and say you see
how much debt and problems they have and
and how how terrific we work I'd like to
see you get on an airplane that was run
purely on free-market principles purely
by an executive that says I'm gonna
maximize profits with no regulations of
any kind you know what you'd have you to
have like that New Yorker cartoon you
ever see that a ticket counter an
airport ticket counter and they had to
signs they said maintenance no
maintenance what would you pick
they had a choice they could have killed
they could have killed they could have
killed a good 10,000 terrorized them
roll the tanks over them their
overwhelming
what's more overwhelming than El
Salvador I mean I mean the mass of
people are against that government that
government the government of Guatemala
which has killed 70,000 people since
1954 overwhelming mass demonstrations in
the face of machine guns but that but
the machine guns in Guatemala opened
fire then they go up into the villages
and destroy the villages and all that so
in the face of overwhelming pressure one
reason those people felt they could be
so overwhelming and outspokenness
because they didn't have the fear that
they were gonna open fire on them so
they were facing a more benign enemy the
one reason solidarity struck and ten
million workers went out back in 1982
was that 83 when it first happened what
they didn't tell you is that all those
workers kept kept collecting their pay
the only country in the world the only
places in the world where workers can go
out on strike and continue to get paid
with socialist countries so you go out
on strike in an in Poland and you
continue to get paid and you got a
government that was saying come on come
on let's talk don't do that you know
we're a worker staple of life you go out
on strike in El Salvador and the death
squads come and put a bullet in your
head in all the leaders head and they
machine-gun the people in the square
when they're marching so I think that
very much was a difference in how power
was operating I've seen them I've seen
I've seen them in New York City when we
had a million people in 1982 for nuclear
freeze and the government said well
go get the hell out and the
media didn't even cover it a million
people and you got a little clip at
night a little quick clip it never made
it never made the major media we got all
we get a hundred thousand out for the
homeless we get so many out for abortion
we get that they don't even look at it
they don't even respond on a policy
forget the nature of the state forget
that forget a revolutionary claim on
ordinary
minimal policies we had to fight for 10
years to get a change in the Vietnam
policy and I'm talking about millions
people that went out and they only the
only reason they finally changed because
they decided they were losing the war at
home that the thing was Saudi
legitimating rule at home that it was
costing too much politically finally
they had to stop and that only happened
because we kept up pressure so much and
because of the courage and persistence
of the Vietnamese people that prolonged
that war if it was a quick easy war they
would have done it but yes there have
been those kind of marches in El
Salvador and people have been killed and
they've been those kind of marches in
Mexico the massacre a chav area i
remember the guys name defense minister
of defense opened fire machine-gun fire
on the on the mexican students there
were tens of thousands of them marching
and they just opened fire and shot them
now can you imagine if that happened in
a socialist country you'd be hearing
about it for the next ten years you'd be
hearing about it I'm being antagonistic
no not they know they very wonderful
crowd it's a one or two people who are
taking things too personally I think
well I'm not sure about Cuba I think
that Cuba might have a Cuba might have a
keener
awareness of imperialism because it's
right there and imperialism is happening
all around but I do believe that
probably the younger generation in Cuba
has some of those same symptoms I've
been talking about they take the social
wage for granted they have no
understanding of imperialism they may
know about it at least they read about
it that it's taught but they don't
really have an experience of it you know
you go to a you go to a peasant a
campesino in Cuba who you know who saved
55 or 60 years old he remembers in his
gut LCM foam weft of a dead time after
the sugar harvest where his children
cried from hunger and all I know you go
you go to somebody now you go to his
grandchildren now or in school 16 17
years old they don't they may have read
about it it's like we've read about
slavery the difference between reading
about slavery and being a slave and
palpably experiencing the utter horror
of slavery is a world of difference you
know and you got to have to do a real
concerted effort of the mind and
imagination even to catch a glimpse
a feeling of what that what that must
have been all about so they don't have
it and they thinking about the thinking
about Michael Jackson and about all the
goodies there are I mean there are oh
I'm not I'm not trying to there are
other Cuban youths that are working in
the volunteer micro brigades and there
are people doing a lot of that stuff too
but I'm not sure that the future of
socialism is secure in Cuba given the
kind of cultural capitalist penetration
that exists listen I want to stop
because I'm really my voice is running
out we don't never know
you